Akbar, the Mughal emperor at the time, the man found at the center of this painting dressed in yellow and blue was en route to lead another campaign after defeating Daud Shah’s attempt to overthrow his empire.
He, along with his men, hoped in boats on the Indus river and departed from Fatehpur to pursue his campaign.
The painting portrays the moment where the messenger stopped Akbar to deliver news to him.
Akbar and the courtier are engaging in a prayer upon receiving the news about the victory in Bengal.
The way in which he is centered in the image and surrounded by the courtier displays his level of power of them and their respect for him.
This scene probably takes place somewhere near the Fatehpur district. This assumption can be drawn based on two things shown in the painting.
First, the unique and detailed architecture found in the building.
The structure resembles a palace and the attention to detail portrays a sense of importance. This is a type of building that would be found in the district of Fatehpur, a city home to the administrative headquarters of the Mughal empire.
Secondly, the courtiers, people who are often in attendance of royal events, appear to have gathered from somewhere near by to pray with Akbar about the good news.
This suggests that there is likely a city nearby where these courtier are from.
The courtier all have their hands placed firmly together for prayer. This group of royal attendants are demonstrating their appreciation for the victory.
The celebration can be depicted through their face expressions and their body language which both indicate a sense of peace.
The courtiers attention is diverted directly towards Akbar, with a space left between them that allows all the courtier to be able to see and appreciate the moment that they are all experiences with the emperor of the Mughal Empire.
Akbar's reinforcements on the other hand are expressing a very different mood.
In contrast to the way that the courtier reacted to Akbar, Akbar's own men that are pilled into the boats in the bottom of the painting on the Indus river are displayed with body language that expresses a very different connotation.
They do not appear to be phased by Akbar's prayer, they are not participating in it and they seem to be busy in conversation and working on the boat.
Akbar was known for his relationship with animals and the use of them in the Mughal Empire during this period. The painting depicts two important animals at the time.
Elephants for one, were seen as a form of wealth and used by royalty within the administrative district for transport. They were are like gold and armor to the empires, something to be won, and a prize with incredible value.
Horses on the other hand, although they are not alive in this painting but are found as decoration on the bow of the boats used by Akbar's men.
Cavalry during the Mughal period was essential to success, survival and also in order to maintain a thriving political economy. Horses were their primary tool, form of army and form of protection during battle.